# Spoofax 1.3.0 (12-11-2014)

We're happy to announce the release of Spoofax 1.3, which improves SDF3, the build system for languages, and the build system for Spoofax itself.

## Porting

### Language projects

The build for language projects has changed since the last Spoofax, so your language projects need to be migrated. To automatically migrate your project, follow these steps:

1. Right click the project in Eclipse
2. Choose Spoofax -> Upgrade Spoofax project
3. Press Finish

This will automatically upgrade your project to the latest format, after which you can build your project normally. The build might fail with:

```
sdf2parenthesize:

BUILD FAILED
/Users/gohla/spoofax/workspace/runtime-Spoofax/Entity/build.generated.xml:266: The following error occurred while executing this line:
Target "sdf2parenthesize.helper" does not exist in the project "Entity".
```

If this is the case, build again, because some files are only upgraded after building once.

Compiled Java files are now stored in the `target/classes` directory instead of the `bin` directory, so the `bin` directory can be deleted.

### SDF3 grammars

SDF2 and old SDF3 grammars can be migrated following these instructions: [How to migrate old SDF grammars into latest SDF3?](../../langdev/meta/lang/sdf3.md).

Some manual changes might still be necessary since a sort cannot have more than one constructor with the same name and arity, and priority rules may contain the entire production instead of priority shorthands.

## Changes

### SDF3

Several improvements have been made to increase the consistency and robustness of SDF3.

- Regular productive productions can be mixed with template productions in the context-free syntax section.

- Each production defines a non-unique sort and a unique constructor of that sort. References point to these definitions and errors are given for undefined elements in the grammar.

- Signatures are generated on-save following the sorts used in the right-hand side of a production and the sort and constructor that are being defined.

- All code generated from SDF3 grammars is organized in the `src-gen` directory of the project, which keeps Spoofax projects more clean and structured.


Contributors: Eduardo Amorim

### Building language projects

Projects are built using Ant Macros tailored to make the build system more incremental.

Language projects can now also be built on the command-line using Maven. See the instructions on [building Spoofax languages](../../dev/build.rst) for more information.


Contributors: Eduardo Amorim, Gabriël Konat

### Building and developing Spoofax

The build system for Spoofax itself has been refactored from a Nix build into a full Maven build. This enables local builds on any system that Maven supports, which is basically any system that supports Java. See the instructions on [building Spoofax](../../dev/build.rst) for more information.the instructions on [using MetaBorg Maven artifacts](../../dev/maven.rst) for more information.
There is now also documentation on [Setting up Eclipse for Spoofax development](../../dev/dev.md), which explains how to set up an environment for developing projects which are included in Spoofax.

The nightly version of Spoofax is now built on our Jenkins server: <https://buildfarm.metaborg.org/>. It publishes artifacts to our artifact server: <https://artifacts.metaborg.org/>. To use these artifacts, read the instructions on the instructions on [using MetaBorg Maven artifacts](../../dev/maven.rst) for more information.


Contributors: Gabriël Konat, Danny Groenewegen, Elmer van Chastelet

### Other

More changes, additions, and bug fixes can be found in the roadmap on our issue tracker: [https://yellowgrass.org/tag/Spoofax/1.3](https://yellowgrass.org/tag/Spoofax/1.3)

## Downloads

### Eclipse plugin update site

The latest stable version of the Spoofax Eclipse plugin is always published to the `stable` update site: `https://download.spoofax.org/update/stable`. See the [getting started guide](../../langdev/start.rst) for instructions on how to get started with Spoofax.

This specific release is also published to the `release/1.3.0` update site: `https://download.spoofax.org/update/release/1.3.0`.

### Sunshine JAR

The Sunshine JAR file corresponding with this release can be [downloaded here](https://download.spoofax.org/update/release/1.3.0/sunshine.jar). See the [Sunshine documentation](https://metaborg.org/spoofax/sunshine) for more information on using Sunshine.

### Maven artifacts

Maven artifacts can be found on our [artifact server](https://artifacts.metaborg.org/content/repositories/releases/org/metaborg/). The Maven version used for this release is `1.3.0`. See the instructions on [using MetaBorg Maven artifacts](../../dev/maven.rst) for more information.
