Spoofax 2.1.0
=============

Spoofax 2.1 improves on Spoofax 2.0 with several bug fixes, an implementation of syntactic completions based on SDF3, and addition of the DynSem dynamic semantics specification meta-language.

See the corresponding :ref:`migration guide <2.1.0-migration-guide>` for migrating from Spoofax 2.0 to Spoofax 2.1.

Downloads
---------

Eclipse plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Premade Eclipse installations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.1.0-eclipse-windows-32-jre_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.1.0-eclipse-windows-64-jre_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.1.0-eclipse-linux-32-jre_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.1.0-eclipse-linux-64-jre_>`_
- `macOS, embedded JRE <2.1.0-eclipse-macos-64-jre_>`_

Without embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits <2.1.0-eclipse-windows-32_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits <2.1.0-eclipse-windows-64_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits <2.1.0-eclipse-linux-32_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits <2.1.0-eclipse-linux-64_>`_
- `macOS <2.1.0-eclipse-macos-64_>`_

Update site
^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Eclipse update site: |2.1.0-eclipse-update-site|
-  `Eclipse update site archive <2.1.0-eclipse-update-site-archive_>`_

IntelliJ plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  IntelliJ update site: |2.1.0-intellij-update-site|
-  `IntelliJ update site archive <2.1.0-intellij-update-site-archive_>`_

Command-line utilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  `Sunshine JAR <2.1.0-sunshine-jar_>`_
-  `SPT testrunner JAR <2.1.0-spt-testrunner-jar_>`_

Core API
~~~~~~~~

-  `Spoofax Core uber JAR <2.1.0-spoofax-core-uber-jar_>`_
-  Spoofax Core uber Maven artifact: |2.1.0-spoofax-core-uber-maven-artifact|

StrategoXT
~~~~~~~~~~

-  `StrategoXT distribution <2.1.0-strategoxt-distrib_>`_
-  `StrategoXT JAR <2.1.0-strategoxt-jar_>`_

Maven artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Maven artifacts can be found on our `artifact server <artifact-server-releases_>`_.
The Maven version used for this release is ``2.1.0``. See the instructions on :ref:`using MetaBorg Maven artifacts <dev-maven>` for more information.

Changes
-------

Syntactic Completions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Spoofax now has support for syntactic completions.
Syntactic completions are generated automatically from an SDF3 specification.
New projects using SDF3 automatically support syntactic completions.
Existing projects need to make a few changes, documented in the :ref:`migration guide <new-completion-framework-migration-guide>`.

DynSem
~~~~~~

DynSem is a DSL for concise and modular specification of dynamic semantics of programming languages.
Fully functional interpreters are automatically derived from dynamic semantics specifications.
For more information about DynSem, see the following sources:

-  `Paper <https://repository.tudelft.nl/islandora/object/uuid:2512f403-521a-47af-8fba-bc433509e2ca/?collection=research>`_
-  :ref:`Documentation <dynsem-index>`
-  :ref:`Getting started tutorial <dynsem-getting-started>`
-  `Example language <https://github.com/MetaBorgCube/simpl>`_

While DynSem was included in Spoofax 2.0.0, we did not advertise this as it was still under heavy development.
Since 2.0.0, the following major improvements were made:

1. `Redesigned semantic component and explication subsystem <https://github.com/metaborg/dynsem/pull/98>`_
2. `Support for tuples <https://github.com/metaborg/dynsem/pull/93>`_
3. :ref:`Updated tutorial for SIMPL <dynsem-getting-started>`
4. :ref:`Added support for unit testing and continuous integration of generated interpreters <dynsem-ci>`
