=============
Spoofax 2.2.0
=============

Spoofax 2.2 improves on Spoofax 2.1 with a new NaBL2 constraint solver which is optimised for performance, improved progress reporting and cancellation in Eclipse, an experimental replacement for ``sdf2table`` which fixes several long-standing bugs, improvements to the core API, and several bug fixes.

See the corresponding :ref:`migration guide <2.2.0-migration-guide>` for migrating from Spoofax 2.1 to Spoofax 2.2.

Downloads
---------

Eclipse plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Premade Eclipse installations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.2.0-eclipse-windows-32-jre_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.2.0-eclipse-windows-64-jre_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.2.0-eclipse-linux-32-jre_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.2.0-eclipse-linux-64-jre_>`_
- `macOS, embedded JRE <2.2.0-eclipse-macos-64-jre_>`_

Without embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits <2.2.0-eclipse-windows-32_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits <2.2.0-eclipse-windows-64_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits <2.2.0-eclipse-linux-32_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits <2.2.0-eclipse-linux-64_>`_
- `macOS <2.2.0-eclipse-macos-64_>`_

Update site
^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Eclipse update site: |2.2.0-eclipse-update-site|
-  `Eclipse update site archive <2.2.0-eclipse-update-site-archive_>`_

IntelliJ plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  IntelliJ update site: |2.2.0-intellij-update-site|
-  `IntelliJ update site archive <2.2.0-intellij-update-site-archive_>`_

Command-line utilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  `Sunshine JAR <2.2.0-sunshine-jar_>`_
-  `SPT testrunner JAR <2.2.0-spt-testrunner-jar_>`_

Core API
~~~~~~~~

-  `Spoofax Core uber JAR <2.2.0-spoofax-core-uber-jar_>`_
-  Spoofax Core uber Maven artifact: |2.2.0-spoofax-core-uber-maven-artifact|

StrategoXT
~~~~~~~~~~

-  `StrategoXT distribution <2.2.0-strategoxt-distrib_>`_
-  `StrategoXT JAR <2.2.0-strategoxt-jar_>`_

Maven artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Maven artifacts can be found on our `artifact server <artifact-server-releases_>`_.
The Maven version used for this release is ``2.2.0``. See the instructions on :ref:`using MetaBorg Maven artifacts <dev-maven>` for more information.

Changes
-------

Overall
~~~~~~~

- The deprecated libraries and files from Spoofax 2.1.0 have been removed. If you have not done so yet, follow the :ref:`Spoofax 2.1.0 migration guide <2.1.0-migration-guide>` to migrate your project to the new Spoofax library.


Core API
~~~~~~~~

- Improve: `Spoofax/190 - Extend API for language discovery <https://yellowgrass.org/issue/Spoofax/190>`_. This deprecates several methods in the language discovery API, see the :ref:`migration guide <2.2.0-migration-guide>` on how to migrate your code.
- Improve: `Spoofax/193 - Stratego warnings in Spoofax language projects with NaBL2 analysis <https://yellowgrass.org/issue/Spoofax/193>`_. The excessive number of warnings from Stratego compilation are now filtered out.
- Improve: Parsing and analysis can report progress and be cancelled.
- Improve: Builds now report progress.
- Fix: Path and project path that are passed to the editor hover strategy are now consistent with paths passed to other strategies.
- Fix: `Spoofax/187 - Provide simplified builder API <https://yellowgrass.org/issue/Spoofax/187>`_.
- Fix: `Spoofax/188 - Java type error in documented language processing code <https://yellowgrass.org/issue/Spoofax/188>`_.

Eclipse
~~~~~~~

- Upgrade: Eclipse Neon (4.6) is now required.
- Improve: Added several switches to the :guilabel:`Spoofax (meta)` menu for disabling analyses and builds, to improve usability in cases where these operations are very slow.
- Improve: Bind new progress reporting and cancellation in core to Eclipse progress monitors, enabling reporting of builds and cancellation of analysis.
- Fix: Fix cancellation not being propagated in SubMonitors, preventing cancellation from working in many places.

SDF3
~~~~

- Feature: Re-implemented the parse table generator in Java, removing the dependency on a platform-specific ``sdf2table`` binary, and fixing several long-standing bugs. This implementation is still being tested, it is therefore only enabled after opt-in. To enable the new implementation, set the following option in your :file:`metaborg.yaml` file:

.. code-block:: yaml

   language:
     sdf:
       sdf2table: java

- Improve: Moved the ``placeholder`` and ``pretty-print`` options in the :file:`metaborg.yaml` file to be under ``language.sdf``, as in:

.. code-block:: yaml

   language:
     sdf:
       placeholder:
         prefix: "[["
         suffix: "]]"
       pretty-print: LangName

NaBL2
~~~~~

- Improve: Introduces a new solver implementation with improved performance.
- Improve: Introduces separate signature sections for *constructors*, *relations*, and *functions*.
- Deprecate: The *types* signature, which will be removed in the next release.

SPT
~~~

- Fix: Several origin tracking issues related to section markers.

DynSem
~~~~~~

- Fix: Analysis crashes on empty **rules** sections (`#161 <https://github.com/metaborg/dynsem/issues/161>`_)
- Improve: Support for abrupt termination: automatic expansion and propagation of read-write semantic components with default values
- Improve: Analysis performance improvements
