=============
Spoofax 2.3.0
=============

Spoofax 2.3 fixes several minor bugs, upgrades to the latest Eclipse and Java versions, includes improvements to SDF3 and NaBL2, and introduces experimental parse table generation and parsing features.

Downloads
---------

Eclipse plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Premade Eclipse installations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.3.0-eclipse-windows-32-jre_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.3.0-eclipse-windows-64-jre_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.3.0-eclipse-linux-32-jre_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.3.0-eclipse-linux-64-jre_>`_
- `macOS, embedded JRE <2.3.0-eclipse-macos-64-jre_>`_

Without embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits <2.3.0-eclipse-windows-32_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits <2.3.0-eclipse-windows-64_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits <2.3.0-eclipse-linux-32_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits <2.3.0-eclipse-linux-64_>`_
- `macOS <2.3.0-eclipse-macos-64_>`_

Update site
^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Eclipse update site: |2.3.0-eclipse-update-site|
-  `Eclipse update site archive <2.3.0-eclipse-update-site-archive_>`_

IntelliJ plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  IntelliJ update site: |2.3.0-intellij-update-site|
-  `IntelliJ update site archive <2.3.0-intellij-update-site-archive_>`_

Command-line utilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  `Sunshine JAR <2.3.0-sunshine-jar_>`_
-  `SPT testrunner JAR <2.3.0-spt-testrunner-jar_>`_

Core API
~~~~~~~~

-  `Spoofax Core uber JAR <2.3.0-spoofax-core-uber-jar_>`_
-  Spoofax Core uber Maven artifact: |2.3.0-spoofax-core-uber-maven-artifact|

StrategoXT
~~~~~~~~~~

-  `StrategoXT distribution <2.3.0-strategoxt-distrib_>`_
-  `StrategoXT JAR <2.3.0-strategoxt-jar_>`_

Maven artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Maven artifacts can be found on our `artifact server <artifact-server-releases_>`_.
The Maven version used for this release is ``2.3.0``. See the instructions on :ref:`using MetaBorg Maven artifacts <dev-maven>` for more information.


Changes
-------

Overall
~~~~~~~

- Improvement: made NaBL2 the default static semantics language.
- Improvement: put deprecated markers on NaBL+TS and Stratego as static semantics languages, and SDF2 as syntax language.
- Improvement: allow configuration of source folders in metaborg.yaml.
- Improvement: allow multiple languages in source and export entries.
- Improvement: add dynsem as a compile dependency to newly generated languages.

Language specification build
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Fix: occasional NPEs when the build failed.
- Fix: hidden dependency error when building Stratego concrete syntax extensions.

Eclipse plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Improvement: updated Eclipse instance generator to generate Eclipse Oxygen instances.
- Improvement: updated Eclipse instance generator to include JDK 8u144b01.
- Improvement: do not reanalyze already analyzed files when opening an editor.
- Improvement: use a default configuration if metaborg.yaml is not present.

NaBL2
~~~~~

- Improvement: extended Stratego API to query reference resolution.
- Improvement: add ? and + operators to regexp syntax for path well-formedness.
- Fix: regexp normalization was only one level deep.
- Fix: non-termination in name resolution in the cases of a direct cycle between a scope.
- Update: conform to latest DynSem version.
- Fix: support all Stratego constructor and sort names, by allowing dashes and single quotes in sort and constructor names.
- Fix: do not crash if dynsem properties file is missing.

SDF3
~~~~

- Improvement: more stable SDF3 parser generator.
- Improvement: new parenthesizer that considers deep priority conflicts.
- Improvement: (experimental) support for lazy parse table generation, where the parse table is generated on-the-fly by the parser.
- Fix: bug in the SDF3 normalizer for groups of priorities outside of a chain.
- Fix: added support for generating the parse table from a "permissive" grammar
- Fix: not necessary to specify the parse table as ``sdf-new.tbl`` in the ESV file when using the new parse table generator.

Parser
~~~~~~

- Added the new (experimental) SGLR parser implementation JSGLR2.
