=============
Spoofax 2.4.0
=============

Spoofax 2.4 fixes several bugs and includes a program generator.

Downloads
---------

Eclipse plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Premade Eclipse installations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.4.0-eclipse-windows-32-jre_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.4.0-eclipse-windows-64-jre_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.4.0-eclipse-linux-32-jre_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.4.0-eclipse-linux-64-jre_>`_
- `macOS, embedded JRE <2.4.0-eclipse-macos-64-jre_>`_

Without embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits <2.4.0-eclipse-windows-32_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits <2.4.0-eclipse-windows-64_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits <2.4.0-eclipse-linux-32_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits <2.4.0-eclipse-linux-64_>`_
- `macOS <2.4.0-eclipse-macos-64_>`_

Update site
^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Eclipse update site: |2.4.0-eclipse-update-site|
-  `Eclipse update site archive <2.4.0-eclipse-update-site-archive_>`_

IntelliJ plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  IntelliJ update site: |2.4.0-intellij-update-site|
-  `IntelliJ update site archive <2.4.0-intellij-update-site-archive_>`_

Command-line utilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  `Sunshine JAR <2.4.0-sunshine-jar_>`_
-  `SPT testrunner JAR <2.4.0-spt-testrunner-jar_>`_

Core API
~~~~~~~~

-  `Spoofax Core uber JAR <2.4.0-spoofax-core-uber-jar_>`_
-  Spoofax Core uber Maven artifact: |2.4.0-spoofax-core-uber-maven-artifact|

StrategoXT
~~~~~~~~~~

-  `StrategoXT distribution <2.4.0-strategoxt-distrib_>`_
-  `StrategoXT JAR <2.4.0-strategoxt-jar_>`_

Maven artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Maven artifacts can be found on our `artifact server <artifact-server-releases_>`_.
The Maven version used for this release is ``2.4.0``. See the instructions on :ref:`using MetaBorg Maven artifacts <dev-maven>` for more information.


Changes
-------

Eclipse Plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Fix: re-parse and re-analyze open editors if the language is reloaded.

NaBL2
~~~~~

- Fix: use deep equality instead of object equality to compare elements in set constraints.
- Fix: prevent clashes of variable names with known lower-case Stratego constructors.
- Improvement: add strategies to the Stratego API to query references and declaration associated with AST nodes.
- Fix: prevent exception traces when hovering over the editor.
- Fix: bug in Stratego generation when complex terms are used in occurrences.
- Fix: bug where editor resolution would only consider leaf nodes, but not parents if the leafs do not resolve.
- Fix: bug where sometimes error messages of files were lost.

Parser
~~~~~~

- Improvement: latest JSGLR2 performance optimizations.
- Fix: bug in JSGLR2 where non-default start symbols were not taken into account.
