==============
Spoofax 2.5.13
==============

Spoofax 2.5.13 contains a couple of small improvements.

Changes
-------

SDF3
~~~~

``prefer`` and ``avoid`` are now deprecated. Usages of the operators will be marked with a deprecation warning.

Parser
~~~~~~

The JSGLR2 parser variants now report warnings on ambiguously parsed substrings. This includes ambiguities in lexical and layout syntax that do not result into ``amb`` nodes in the AST.

SPT
~~~

The ``run`` expectation now allows to call strategies with term arguments. It's now also possible to test if a strategy failed. See the SPT documentation for more details.



Downloads
---------

Eclipse plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Premade Eclipse installations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.13-eclipse-windows-32-jre_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.13-eclipse-windows-64-jre_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.13-eclipse-linux-64-jre_>`_
- `macOS, embedded JRE <2.5.13-eclipse-macos-64-jre_>`_

Without embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits <2.5.13-eclipse-windows-32_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits <2.5.13-eclipse-windows-64_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits <2.5.13-eclipse-linux-64_>`_
- `macOS <2.5.13-eclipse-macos-64_>`_

Update site
^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Eclipse update site: |2.5.13-eclipse-update-site|
-  `Eclipse update site archive <2.5.13-eclipse-update-site-archive_>`_

IntelliJ plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  IntelliJ update site: |2.5.13-intellij-update-site|
-  `IntelliJ update site archive <2.5.13-intellij-update-site-archive_>`_

Command-line utilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  `Sunshine JAR <2.5.13-sunshine-jar_>`_
-  `SPT testrunner JAR <2.5.13-spt-testrunner-jar_>`_

Core API
~~~~~~~~

-  `Spoofax Core uber JAR <2.5.13-spoofax-core-uber-jar_>`_
-  Spoofax Core uber Maven artifact: |2.5.13-spoofax-core-uber-maven-artifact|

StrategoXT
~~~~~~~~~~

-  `StrategoXT distribution <2.5.13-strategoxt-distrib_>`_
-  `StrategoXT JAR <2.5.13-strategoxt-jar_>`_

Maven artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Maven artifacts can be found on our `artifact server <artifact-server-releases_>`_.
The Maven version used for this release is ``2.5.13``. See the instructions on :ref:`using MetaBorg Maven artifacts <dev-maven>` for more information.
