==============
Spoofax 2.5.10
==============

Spoofax 2.5.10 contains several smaller improvements.

Changes
-------

Overall
~~~~~~~

- Update Apache VFS2 to 2.6.0
- Support for TypeSmart was removed.
  We anticipate a more useable type analysis for Stratego in the form of a gradual type system.

  The ``metaborg.yaml`` file of a generated project used to contain
  a ``debug: typesmart: false``. This was to turn off the TypeSmart dynamic
  analysis by default. This analysis would stop any Stratego code when it tried
  to construct a tree that did not conform to the grammar of the project.

  To our knowledge TypeSmart was not used in any active Spoofax project. It did,
  however, slow down the build time of all Spoofax projects, because extraction
  of the grammar into a TypeSmart readable format had to be done even if the
  analysis was off for that project. These two points, and the anticipation of
  a gradual type system for Stratego, were the reasons to drop TypeSmart support.

SDF3
~~~~

Lexical and context-free sort declarations: In SDF3 you can now explicitly declare your sorts. Declare lexical sorts in a ``lexical sorts`` block, and context-free sorts in a ``context-free sorts`` block. Sorts declared in a kernel ``sorts`` block default to declaring context-free sorts until a suffix such as ``-LEX`` is added. Note that you have to use ``sdf2table: java`` to support lexical sorts.

Statix
~~~~~~

- New project that use Statix automatically have the Statix signature generator enabled. For this to work properly, declare your lexical and context-free sorts in SDF3 explicitly. See the :ref:`Statix signature generator <statix-signature-generator>` documentation for more information.
- Statix specifications are now compiled as much as possible, even if there are errors in some files. Errors in Statix files that are not actually imported, do not cause analysis to fail on an empty specification anymore.

Stratego
~~~~~~~~

Combined compiled Stratego and helper code Compilation of Stratego and helper code written in Java (in ``src/main/strategies``) is now combined in a single jar file per Spoofax language instead of two. See the migration guide for more information on what to change in your Spoofax project.

SPT
~~~

SPT gains support for the ``parse ambiguous`` expectation, which succeeds when a fragment parses successfully but with ambiguities. Tests with the ``parse succeeds`` expectation will now fail when the input parses ambiguously. To write tests for ambiguous parses, use the ``parse ambiguous`` expectation instead.


Downloads
---------

Eclipse plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Premade Eclipse installations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.10-eclipse-windows-32-jre_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.10-eclipse-windows-64-jre_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.10-eclipse-linux-32-jre_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.10-eclipse-linux-64-jre_>`_
- `macOS, embedded JRE <2.5.10-eclipse-macos-64-jre_>`_

Without embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits <2.5.10-eclipse-windows-32_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits <2.5.10-eclipse-windows-64_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits <2.5.10-eclipse-linux-32_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits <2.5.10-eclipse-linux-64_>`_
- `macOS <2.5.10-eclipse-macos-64_>`_

Update site
^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Eclipse update site: |2.5.10-eclipse-update-site|
-  `Eclipse update site archive <2.5.10-eclipse-update-site-archive_>`_

IntelliJ plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  IntelliJ update site: |2.5.10-intellij-update-site|
-  `IntelliJ update site archive <2.5.10-intellij-update-site-archive_>`_

Command-line utilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  `Sunshine JAR <2.5.10-sunshine-jar_>`_
-  `SPT testrunner JAR <2.5.10-spt-testrunner-jar_>`_

Core API
~~~~~~~~

-  `Spoofax Core uber JAR <2.5.10-spoofax-core-uber-jar_>`_
-  Spoofax Core uber Maven artifact: |2.5.10-spoofax-core-uber-maven-artifact|

StrategoXT
~~~~~~~~~~

-  `StrategoXT distribution <2.5.10-strategoxt-distrib_>`_
-  `StrategoXT JAR <2.5.10-strategoxt-jar_>`_

Maven artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Maven artifacts can be found on our `artifact server <artifact-server-releases_>`_.
The Maven version used for this release is ``2.5.10``. See the instructions on :ref:`using MetaBorg Maven artifacts <dev-maven>` for more information.

