==============
Spoofax 2.5.16
==============

Spoofax 2.5.16 contains a couple of small improvements and bug fixes.

Changes
-------

SDF3
~~~~
* This release fixes the bug with the automatic generation of namespaced grammars, which was introduced in the previous release.

Statix
~~~~~~
* Added ``stc-get-ast-ref`` rule to the Stratego API, which can be used to query
  ``ref`` properties.
* The Stratego primitives now issue console warnings when invalid labels or
  properties are used.
* Fixed a bug where ``stx-get-scopegraph-data`` would return unification variables instead of their values.
* Changed the default data order to ``true``, to make queries where only a label order is provided apply shadowing as expected.
* Added a menu option to execute tests with the concurrent solver
* Fixed a completeness bug in the traditional solver when executing queries in dataWf or dataLeq predicates.

Downloads
---------

Eclipse plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Premade Eclipse installations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.16-eclipse-windows-32-jre_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.16-eclipse-windows-64-jre_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.16-eclipse-linux-64-jre_>`_
- `macOS, embedded JRE <2.5.16-eclipse-macos-64-jre_>`_

Without embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits <2.5.16-eclipse-windows-32_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits <2.5.16-eclipse-windows-64_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits <2.5.16-eclipse-linux-64_>`_
- `macOS <2.5.16-eclipse-macos-64_>`_

Update site
^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Eclipse update site: |2.5.16-eclipse-update-site|
-  `Eclipse update site archive <2.5.16-eclipse-update-site-archive_>`_

IntelliJ plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  IntelliJ update site: |2.5.16-intellij-update-site|
-  `IntelliJ update site archive <2.5.16-intellij-update-site-archive_>`_

Command-line utilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  `Sunshine JAR <2.5.16-sunshine-jar_>`_
-  `SPT testrunner JAR <2.5.16-spt-testrunner-jar_>`_

Core API
~~~~~~~~

-  `Spoofax Core uber JAR <2.5.16-spoofax-core-uber-jar_>`_
-  Spoofax Core uber Maven artifact: |2.5.16-spoofax-core-uber-maven-artifact|

StrategoXT
~~~~~~~~~~

-  `StrategoXT distribution <2.5.16-strategoxt-distrib_>`_
-  `StrategoXT JAR <2.5.16-strategoxt-jar_>`_

Maven artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Maven artifacts can be found on our `artifact server <artifact-server-releases_>`_.
The Maven version used for this release is ``2.5.16``. See the instructions on :ref:`using MetaBorg Maven artifacts <dev-maven>` for more information.

