=============
Spoofax 2.5.2
=============

Changes
-------

NaBL2
~~~~~

A bug introduced in 2.5.2 would remove the parse error in the editor as soon as analysis failed. This bug has been fixed.

FlowSpec
~~~~~~~~

A whole host of bugs has been fixed in FlowSpec, mostly ones that lead to no clear error message. Much of the system has also been optimized for speed.

Stratego
~~~~~~~~

Separate compilation for Stratego was added in this release. It is currently still experimental. It is documented as a separate item under the Stratego documentation, including instructions on how to opt-in to it and what its limitations are.

The Stratego primitives ``all``, ``some`` and ``one`` sometimes lost annotations and origins of list tails when an element in the list was transformed. This bug has been fixed.


Downloads
---------

Eclipse plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Premade Eclipse installations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.2-eclipse-windows-32-jre_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.2-eclipse-windows-64-jre_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.2-eclipse-linux-32-jre_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.2-eclipse-linux-64-jre_>`_
- `macOS, embedded JRE <2.5.2-eclipse-macos-64-jre_>`_

Without embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits <2.5.2-eclipse-windows-32_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits <2.5.2-eclipse-windows-64_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits <2.5.2-eclipse-linux-32_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits <2.5.2-eclipse-linux-64_>`_
- `macOS <2.5.2-eclipse-macos-64_>`_

Update site
^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Eclipse update site: |2.5.2-eclipse-update-site|
-  `Eclipse update site archive <2.5.2-eclipse-update-site-archive_>`_

IntelliJ plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  IntelliJ update site: |2.5.2-intellij-update-site|
-  `IntelliJ update site archive <2.5.2-intellij-update-site-archive_>`_

Command-line utilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  `Sunshine JAR <2.5.2-sunshine-jar_>`_
-  `SPT testrunner JAR <2.5.2-spt-testrunner-jar_>`_

Core API
~~~~~~~~

-  `Spoofax Core uber JAR <2.5.2-spoofax-core-uber-jar_>`_
-  Spoofax Core uber Maven artifact: |2.5.2-spoofax-core-uber-maven-artifact|

StrategoXT
~~~~~~~~~~

-  `StrategoXT distribution <2.5.2-strategoxt-distrib_>`_
-  `StrategoXT JAR <2.5.2-strategoxt-jar_>`_

Maven artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Maven artifacts can be found on our `artifact server <artifact-server-releases_>`_.
The Maven version used for this release is ``2.5.2``. See the instructions on :ref:`using MetaBorg Maven artifacts <dev-maven>` for more information.
