=============
Spoofax 2.5.3
=============

Spoofax 2.5.3 is a minor release with bugfixes, performance improvements, and new small and/or experimental features.

Changes
-------

Overall
~~~~~~~

- Added support for getting the selected term in Stratego builders/transformations. In the builder tuple ``(node, _, ast, path, projectPath)``, the first term (``node``) is now the selected term when a builder is executed in the context of an editor with a selection. The term is selected by finding the outermost term that has an origin that fits in the selection.
- Fixed a bug that prevented source transformations from being run if context or analysis were missing.
- Changed constraint analyzer to support more multi-file scenarios.

JSGLR2
~~~~~~

- Added an incremental variant of the JSGLR2 parser (experimental).

NaBL2
~~~~~

- Improved preformance of AST resolution lookups.

Statix (experimental)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Fixed bugs and improved performance.

Eclipse
~~~~~~~

- Added a lifecycle mapping that adds a Spoofax nature to an imported spoofax-project.


Downloads
---------

Eclipse plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Premade Eclipse installations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.3-eclipse-windows-32-jre_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.3-eclipse-windows-64-jre_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.3-eclipse-linux-32-jre_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.3-eclipse-linux-64-jre_>`_
- `macOS, embedded JRE <2.5.3-eclipse-macos-64-jre_>`_

Without embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits <2.5.3-eclipse-windows-32_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits <2.5.3-eclipse-windows-64_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits <2.5.3-eclipse-linux-32_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits <2.5.3-eclipse-linux-64_>`_
- `macOS <2.5.3-eclipse-macos-64_>`_

Update site
^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Eclipse update site: |2.5.3-eclipse-update-site|
-  `Eclipse update site archive <2.5.3-eclipse-update-site-archive_>`_

IntelliJ plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  IntelliJ update site: |2.5.3-intellij-update-site|
-  `IntelliJ update site archive <2.5.3-intellij-update-site-archive_>`_

Command-line utilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  `Sunshine JAR <2.5.3-sunshine-jar_>`_
-  `SPT testrunner JAR <2.5.3-spt-testrunner-jar_>`_

Core API
~~~~~~~~

-  `Spoofax Core uber JAR <2.5.3-spoofax-core-uber-jar_>`_
-  Spoofax Core uber Maven artifact: |2.5.3-spoofax-core-uber-maven-artifact|

StrategoXT
~~~~~~~~~~

-  `StrategoXT distribution <2.5.3-strategoxt-distrib_>`_
-  `StrategoXT JAR <2.5.3-strategoxt-jar_>`_

Maven artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Maven artifacts can be found on our `artifact server <artifact-server-releases_>`_.
The Maven version used for this release is ``2.5.3``. See the instructions on :ref:`using MetaBorg Maven artifacts <dev-maven>` for more information.
