==============
Spoofax 2.5.15
==============

Spoofax 2.5.15 contains a couple of small improvements and bug fixes, and supports the old SDF2-based parse table generator on macOS Catalina (10.15) and above.

See the corresponding :ref:`migration guide <2.5.15-migration-guide>` for migrating from Spoofax 2.5.14 to Spoofax 2.5.15.

Changes
-------

macOS
~~~~~

* On macOS, Spoofax temporarily requires `Docker <https://docs.docker.com/docker-for-mac/install/>`_
  and ``coreutils`` when building Spoofax on macOS Catalina, Big Sur, or newer. (This is only when
  you build Spoofax yourself instead of downloading it for this website, it does not influence building
  Spoofax projects.)

SDF3
~~~~

* Fixed tree indexes in layout constraints/declarations to make them 0-based.

Statix
~~~~~~

* Fixed origin tracking in Statix injection explication for new projects
  that caused the top-level term of an AST to be missing
  when a Stratego strategy is applied to an analyzed AST in an SPT test.
* Add a menu action to view the scope graph resulting from Statix analysis.
* Deprecate namespaces, occurrences and query sugar.
* Fix bug in evaluation of ``try`` construct.
* Improvements to memory usage and runtime of the solver.
* Improve rule overlap handling: consider variables already bound to the left
  more specific than concrete patterns, to keep with left-to-right specificity.
* Add configuration settings to control trace length and term depth in error messages.

Stratego
~~~~~~~~

* The previously advertised incremental compiler was considered too slow and attempts to make it faster
  made it less stable. It is currently not recommended for general use, while we develop a new version.
  The documentation on how to use contains a similar warning now. 

Downloads
---------

Eclipse plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Premade Eclipse installations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.15-eclipse-windows-32-jre_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.15-eclipse-windows-64-jre_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.15-eclipse-linux-64-jre_>`_
- `macOS, embedded JRE <2.5.15-eclipse-macos-64-jre_>`_

Without embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits <2.5.15-eclipse-windows-32_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits <2.5.15-eclipse-windows-64_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits <2.5.15-eclipse-linux-64_>`_
- `macOS <2.5.15-eclipse-macos-64_>`_

Update site
^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Eclipse update site: |2.5.15-eclipse-update-site|
-  `Eclipse update site archive <2.5.15-eclipse-update-site-archive_>`_

IntelliJ plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  IntelliJ update site: |2.5.15-intellij-update-site|
-  `IntelliJ update site archive <2.5.15-intellij-update-site-archive_>`_

Command-line utilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  `Sunshine JAR <2.5.15-sunshine-jar_>`_
-  `SPT testrunner JAR <2.5.15-spt-testrunner-jar_>`_

Core API
~~~~~~~~

-  `Spoofax Core uber JAR <2.5.15-spoofax-core-uber-jar_>`_
-  Spoofax Core uber Maven artifact: |2.5.15-spoofax-core-uber-maven-artifact|

StrategoXT
~~~~~~~~~~

-  `StrategoXT distribution <2.5.15-strategoxt-distrib_>`_
-  `StrategoXT JAR <2.5.15-strategoxt-jar_>`_

Maven artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Maven artifacts can be found on our `artifact server <artifact-server-releases_>`_.
The Maven version used for this release is ``2.5.15``. See the instructions on :ref:`using MetaBorg Maven artifacts <dev-maven>` for more information.

