=============
Spoofax 2.5.5
=============

Spoofax 2.5.5 is a minor bugfix release.
There are a few incompatiable changes in Statix, which are described in the :ref:`migration guide <2.5.5-migration-guide>`.

Changes
-------

Overall
~~~~~~~

- Do not throw away error messages in unchanged files if other files changed, when using constraint analyzer.

JSGLR
~~~~~

- Add missing location information on sublists.

Statix
~~~~~~

- Improve speed of normalization.
- Add AST properties and editor reference resolution.
- Regular expression and label order are direct parameters to queries. It is not possible anymore to pass an arbitary predicate there.
- Special path constraints are removed in favour of concrete path terms that can be matched as terms.
- Functional constraints can only have a single output.
- Namespace based resolution short-hands must contain a occurrence literal, and explicit resolution policies.

Downloads
---------

Eclipse plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Premade Eclipse installations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.5-eclipse-windows-32-jre_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.5-eclipse-windows-64-jre_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.5-eclipse-linux-32-jre_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.5-eclipse-linux-64-jre_>`_
- `macOS, embedded JRE <2.5.5-eclipse-macos-64-jre_>`_

Without embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits <2.5.5-eclipse-windows-32_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits <2.5.5-eclipse-windows-64_>`_
- `Linux 32-bits <2.5.5-eclipse-linux-32_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits <2.5.5-eclipse-linux-64_>`_
- `macOS <2.5.5-eclipse-macos-64_>`_

Update site
^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Eclipse update site: |2.5.5-eclipse-update-site|
-  `Eclipse update site archive <2.5.5-eclipse-update-site-archive_>`_

IntelliJ plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  IntelliJ update site: |2.5.5-intellij-update-site|
-  `IntelliJ update site archive <2.5.5-intellij-update-site-archive_>`_

Command-line utilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  `Sunshine JAR <2.5.5-sunshine-jar_>`_
-  `SPT testrunner JAR <2.5.5-spt-testrunner-jar_>`_

Core API
~~~~~~~~

-  `Spoofax Core uber JAR <2.5.5-spoofax-core-uber-jar_>`_
-  Spoofax Core uber Maven artifact: |2.5.5-spoofax-core-uber-maven-artifact|

StrategoXT
~~~~~~~~~~

-  `StrategoXT distribution <2.5.5-strategoxt-distrib_>`_
-  `StrategoXT JAR <2.5.5-strategoxt-jar_>`_

Maven artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Maven artifacts can be found on our `artifact server <artifact-server-releases_>`_.
The Maven version used for this release is ``2.5.5``. See the instructions on :ref:`using MetaBorg Maven artifacts <dev-maven>` for more information.
