==============
Spoofax 2.5.12
==============

Spoofax 2.5.12 contains an experimental gradual type system for Stratego, performance improvements to NaBL2 and Statix, and updates to Eclipse installations and their embedded JREs.

Changes
-------

Stratego
~~~~~~~~

Stratego has two new reserved words: ``cast`` and ``is``. Local variables can be reserved words if they start with ``'``, so you can use ``'cast`` and ``'is``.

Under the Stratego language options in your ``metaborg.yaml`` file you can turn on the gradual type system, if you use the incremental compiler. This option is ``gradual: static``, and only tests the types statically. The default is ``gradual: none`` right now, meaning the gradual type system is not on by default. There is an experimental third option ``gradual: dynamic`` which not only checks the types statically but also inserts casts to check types dynamically where necessary.

NaBL2
~~~~~

NaBL2 supports a new resolution algorithm based on fexid-point environment computation instead of graph search, which can be enabled by adding ``strategy environments`` to the ``name-resolution`` signature section.
It has much better performance characteristics, especially when dealing with mutually importing scopes and transitive imports.
Compared the the search-based, the environment-based algorithm can get stuck on scope graphs with cycles involving scopes importing references that can be resolved via that same scope.
Note that the environment-based algorithm may increase memory usage.
The default remains the search-based algorithm.

Statix
~~~~~~

Analysis times of large, multi-file Statix specifications has improved significantly.

Eclipse
~~~~~~~

* Premade Eclipse installations have been updated from Eclipse Photon to Eclipse 2020-6.
* Premade Eclipse installations for 32-bit Linux are no longer created.
* Embedded JRE in premade Eclipse installations has been updated from 8u162 (Oracle JRE) to 8u265-b01 (AdoptOpenJDK).



Downloads
---------

Eclipse plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Premade Eclipse installations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.12-eclipse-windows-32-jre_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.12-eclipse-windows-64-jre_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits, embedded JRE <2.5.12-eclipse-linux-64-jre_>`_
- `macOS, embedded JRE <2.5.12-eclipse-macos-64-jre_>`_

Without embedded JRE:

- `Windows 32-bits <2.5.12-eclipse-windows-32_>`_
- `Windows 64-bits <2.5.12-eclipse-windows-64_>`_
- `Linux 64-bits <2.5.12-eclipse-linux-64_>`_
- `macOS <2.5.12-eclipse-macos-64_>`_

Update site
^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Eclipse update site: |2.5.12-eclipse-update-site|
-  `Eclipse update site archive <2.5.12-eclipse-update-site-archive_>`_

IntelliJ plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  IntelliJ update site: |2.5.12-intellij-update-site|
-  `IntelliJ update site archive <2.5.12-intellij-update-site-archive_>`_

Command-line utilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  `Sunshine JAR <2.5.12-sunshine-jar_>`_
-  `SPT testrunner JAR <2.5.12-spt-testrunner-jar_>`_

Core API
~~~~~~~~

-  `Spoofax Core uber JAR <2.5.12-spoofax-core-uber-jar_>`_
-  Spoofax Core uber Maven artifact: |2.5.12-spoofax-core-uber-maven-artifact|

StrategoXT
~~~~~~~~~~

-  `StrategoXT distribution <2.5.12-strategoxt-distrib_>`_
-  `StrategoXT JAR <2.5.12-strategoxt-jar_>`_

Maven artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Maven artifacts can be found on our `artifact server <artifact-server-releases_>`_.
The Maven version used for this release is ``2.5.12``. See the instructions on :ref:`using MetaBorg Maven artifacts <dev-maven>` for more information.

