# Spoofax 2.0.0 Migration Guide

This migration guide describes the differences between Spoofax 1.5 and 2.0 and describes the steps to convert a Spoofax 1.5 project to Spoofax 2.0 project.

To gather the required knowledge for migrating a language project, go through the documentation in the following order:

1. [Language Development Getting Started](../../langdev/start.md), to install and get familiar with Spoofax 2.0.
2. [Spoofax 2.0 Release Notes](../note/2.0.0.md), for a general overview of the changes in Spoofax 2.0.
3. This document, for the concrete differences and steps to convert your Spoofax project.

## Differences

### Concepts

Spoofax 2.0 introduces several new concepts and terminology.

A *language specification* is the specification of a language using meta-languages.

A *language specification project* specifies a *language component*. When the specification is compiled, the result is a component which can be loaded into Spoofax. A language component has specifications and implementations for parts of a language, such as its parser, pretty-printer, analysis, transformations, editor services, etc.

A component contributes these parts to a *language implementation*. Multiple components can contribute to the same language implementation, and components can contribute to multiple language implementations. In the most simple case, a single component contributes all parts of the language to a single implementation.

Language components can *depend* on other language components to depend on parts of a language. Currently, there are two kinds of dependencies: compile and source dependencies.

A *compile dependency* on a language component is used to compile source files of that language component. For example, a compile dependency on NaBL will ensure that all <span class='file'>.nab</span> files are compiled into <span class='file'>.str</span> files.

A *source dependency* is used to depend on source files of a language component. Source dependencies are used to depend on libraries, for example to depend on a Stratego library for name and type analysis. They are also used to compose multiple language components into a single language component, for example to do language extension.

A *language* is the more abstract notion of a language, which has multiple language implementations. For example, the Java *language* has the JDK7 and JDK8 *implementations*, which each have front-end and back-end *components*.

An *end-user project* is a project with programs of an end-user language, in contrast to a language specification project which has programs of meta-languages. For example, a Java project is a Java end-user project, whereas the JDK project is a language specification project.

### Project structure

The project structure of language specification projects has significantly changed. The biggest change is that these projects are no longer Eclipse (plugin) projects, so that they can be used outside of the Eclipse platform as well. Ant build files have also been removed since we do not use Ant to build projects any more. Many ESV files have been deprecated, and all generated ESV files in the <span class='file'>editor</span> directory have been removed.

The following files and directories are no longer part of the project structure:

* Ant build: <span class='file'>.externalToolBuilders</span>, <span class='file'>build.generated.xml</span>, <span class='file'>build.main.xml</span>
* Eclipse plugin: <span class='file'>plugin.xml</span>, <span class='file'>META-INF</span>
* Eclipse project: <span class='file'>.settings</span>, <span class='file'>.classpath</span>, <span class='file'>.project</span>, <span class='file'>build.properties</span>
* Refactoring: <span class='file'>lib/refactor-common.generated.str</span>
* Deprecated ESV files: <span class='file'>editor/langname-Completions.esv</span>, <span class='file'>editor/langname-Folding.esv</span>, <span class='file'>editor/langname-Outliner.str</span>, <span class='file'>editor/langname-Refactorings.esv</span>
* Generated ESV files: <span class='file'>editor/langname-\*.generated.esv</span>, <span class='file'>editor/langname-Outliner.generated.str</span>
* The RTG and signatures files are no longer generated for SDF3 projects, since SDF3 generates its own signatures.
* The generated box pp files are no longer generated, and box pp files are no longer converted into pp.af files.

The following files and directories have been moved:

* ESV
  * Main ESV file must be at <span class='file'>editor/Main.esv</span>. If it does not exist, no packed ESV file will be generated.
  * Packed ESV file: <span class='file'>target/metaborg/editor.esv.af</span>
* SDF
  * Definition: <span class='file'>src-gen/syntax/[LanguageName].def</span>
  * Permissive definition: <span class='file'>src-gen/syntax/[LanguageName]-permissive.def</span>
  * Parenthesizer: <span class='file'>src-gen/pp/[LanguageName]-parenthesize.str</span>
  * Parse table: <span class='file'>target/metaborg/sdf.tbl</span>
* Stratego
  * 'editor-common.generated' file: <span class='file'>src-gen/stratego/metaborg.str</span>
  * Ctree: <span class='file'>target/metaborg/stratego.ctree</span>
  * Generated Java files: <span class='file'>src-gen/stratego-java</span>
  * JAR: <span class='file'>target/metaborg/stratego.jar</span>
  * Java strategies: <span class='file'>src/main/strategies</span>
  * Java strategies JAR: <span class='file'>target/metaborg/stratego-javastrat.jar</span>
  * Build cache: <span class='file'>target/stratego-cache</span>
* DynSem
  * Manual Java: <span class='file'>src/main/ds</span>
  * Generated Java: <span class='file'>src-gen/ds-java</span>

The following generated files and directories still exist, but should not be published to source control any more:

* <span class='file'>lib/editor-common.generated.str</span> or <span class='file'>stratego/metaborg.str</span>
* <span class='file'>src-gen</span>

When importing a language specification project into Eclipse or IntelliJ, several platform-specific files will be generated. These files should not be published to source control to keep projects as platform-agnostic as possible.

### Eclipse

##### Importing

To import a language specification project into Eclipse, use <span class='menuselection'>Import... ‣ Maven ‣ Existing Maven Projects</span>. We use Maven to set up the correct Java dependencies, which is why there is no special 'Existing Spoofax Projects' importer.

##### Builds

Eclipse has the concept of incremental project builders, which incrementally parse, analyze, and compile files inside a project. An example of such a project builder is the Eclipse JDT builder which incrementally builds Java files. Spoofax 1.5  did not use this functionality, but the new Eclipse plugin in Spoofax 2.0 does.

The project builder for Spoofax parses, analyses, executes transformations, and shows all error markers, for all language files (Stratego files, SDF3 files, files of your language, etc.) in the project. If the project is opened for the first time, a full build will occur, building all language files. When changes occur in the project, an incremental build occurs, building only changed files.

The commands under the <span class='guilabel'>Project</span> menu in Eclipse now also affect Spoofax projects.
Executing <span class='menuselection'>Project ‣ Build...</span> (or pressing <kbd>Ctrl/Cmd+Alt+B</kbd>) will build the project.

Executing <span class='menuselection'>Project ‣ Clean...</span> will delete the <span class='guilabel'>.cache</span> directory, reset the index and task engine, remove all error markers, and reanalyze and rebuild all files in the project. This makes the <span class='guilabel'>Reset and Reanalyze</span> builder unnecessary, since this is now properly integrated with Eclipse.

Automatic building can also be turned off by disabling <span class='menuselection'>Project ‣ Build Automatically</span>. Builds will then only occur if <span class='menuselection'>Project ‣ Build Project</span> is executed or if <kbd>Ctrl/Cmd+Alt+B</kbd> is pressed.

Furthermore, the language specification build is no longer written in Ant, but in Java using the [Pluto](http://pluto-build.github.io/) incremental build system.

##### Natures

The Spoofax language specification project builder is not enabled by default, to enable it a 'Spoofax meta nature' must be added to the project. A nature in Eclipse is a project tag which enables functionality for that project. To add the Spoofax nature to a project, right click the project, and choose <span class='menuselection'>Spoofax (meta) ‣ Add Spoofax meta nature</span>.
When importing a language specification, this nature is automatically added.

For end-user projects, right click the project, and choose <span class='menuselection'>Spoofax ‣ Add Spoofax nature</span> to add a nature for end-user projects.

Editors will parse and analyze files regardless of there being a Spoofax nature, but the on-save handler will not be called.

#### Builders

Builders for the open editor are now located in the <span class='guilabel'>Spoofax</span> main menu instead of buttons on the tool bar. Builders wait for the analyzed AST if needed, so the issue where builders are sometimes not executed on the analyzed AST should be solved now.

Builders can also be executed on a set of files by selecting the files in the project or package explorer, right clicking the files, selecting the language name from the menu, and then selecting a builder.

#### Cancellation

Editor updates can now be cancelled by clicking the red stop button in the progress view. If the progress view is not visible, you can open it by choosing <span class='menuselection'>Window ‣ Show View ‣ Progress</span>. If the editor update is not responsive (it is looping for example), the thread running the editor update will be killed after a while.

Killing a thread during analysis may leave the index and task engine in an inconsistent state. If this happens, clean the project using <span class='menuselection'>Project ‣ Clean...</span> to force a full build, which makes the state consistent again. Killing a thread is not very well supported in Java and may break Eclipse or even the JVM, which then requires a restart.

Project builds and transformations can also be cancelled in the progress view.

#### Console logging

Console logging in the new plugin is more prominent so that we can diagnose problems more easily. If the console is not visible, you can open it by choosing <span class='menuselection'>Window ‣ Show View ‣ Console</span>. The console does not automatically pop-up when there is a message any more, so it can also be hidden by just closing it.

All warning and error messages are also sent to Eclipse's error log. The error log can sometimes contain more information about exceptions and stack traces in errors. If the error log is not visible, you can open it by choosing <span class='menuselection'>Window ‣ Show View ‣ Error Log</span>.

#### Manually loading/unloading a language

A language can be manually loaded or reloaded by right clicking a project and choosing <span class='menuselection'>Spoofax (meta) ‣ Load language</span>, and unloaded with <span class='menuselection'>Spoofax (meta) ‣ Unload language</span>.

#### External dependencies

The new plugin does not depend on a modified version of IMP, making it possible to install the Rascal plugin alongside the Spoofax plugin. All other external dependencies are limited to the Spoofax plugin, which should prevent conflicts with other Eclipse plugins.

## Converting a project

If your project is simple (e.g. it only has syntax and a few transformations), the easiest way to convert your project is to create a new Spoofax language specification project, and to copy your files into that project.

Otherwise, Spoofax 2.0 supports converting an old Spoofax project into a new Spoofax project, but some conversions need to be done manually.

```eval_rst
.. warning:: Converting a Spoofax project is a destructive operation, some files will be deleted, replaced, or changed. Make a backup of your projects before doing any conversions!
```

### Automatic conversion

First, import your existing Spoofax project into Eclipse using <span class='menuselection'>File ‣ Import... ‣ Existing Projects into Workspace</span>.
Right click the project, and choose <span class='menuselection'>Spoofax (meta) ‣ Upgrade language project</span>. A wizard screen will pop up where you have to fill in some details about your language.

If a <span class='file'>packed.esv</span> file was found, Spoofax will try to fill in some fields for you. If not, all fields need to be filled in manually. The *id* and *name* of your language can be found in the main ESV file. For *group id*, use a Maven identifier for your organization (e.g. org.metaborg), and as *version*: 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT.

```eval_rst
.. warning:: Make sure that the *id* and *name* fields match exactly with the fields in your ESV file, otherwise the conversion will go wrong.
```

Press finish to convert the language project.

### Manual conversion

Unfortunately, not all required conversions can be done automatically. Do the following conversions manually.

#### Project configuration

Most of the project configuration is now in the <span class='file'>metaborg.yaml</span> file.
The [manual page on configuration](../../langdev/config/reference.md) lists all configuration options.

* Add/remove compile and source dependencies as needed.
* Add build configuration, such as Stratego compiler arguments, SDF compiler arguments, external def files, and external JAR files.

#### Imports

In Stratego, SDF2, SDF3, NaBL, and TS files:

* Remove `src-gen`, `lib`, and `trans`, from module names and imports. These paths are now on the source path of the SDF and Stratego compilers.

In Stratego, NaBL, and TS files:

* Instead of importing `lib/editor-common.generated`, import `stratego/metaborg`.
* Instead of importing `include/<langname>-parenthesize`, import `pp/<langname>-parenthesize`.
* If you're using SDF3:
  * Instead of importing the signatures from `include/<langname>`, import them from `signatures/<langname>-sig`. These signatures are spread over multiple files, import all the required files to fix errors, since the Stratego editor does not handle transitive imports. You can also use the wildcard import `signatures/-` to import all signature files, if your syntax definition is not spread over multiple directories.
* If you're using SDF2 or an external definition file:
  * Instead of importing the signatures from `include/<langname>`, import them from `signatures/<langname>`.

#### SDF

If you are still using SDF2 instead of SDF3, add the following setting to the <span class='file'>metaborg.yaml</span> file:

```yaml
language:
  sdf:
    version: sdf2
```

#### NaBL and TS

If you’re using a NaBL/TS based analysis, perform the following changes:

* NaBL files are now generated into <span class='file'>src-gen/names</span>, fix imports to NaBL files, delete old generated NaBL files.
* TS files are now generated into <span class='file'>src-gen/types</span>, fix imports to TS files, delete old generated TS files.
* The `editor-analyze` calls have been changed. Remove `analysis-single-default-interface`, `analysis-multiple-default-interface`, and `editor-analyze`. Replace it with:
```str
editor-analyze = analyze-all(pre-analysis, post-analysis, pp-message|<language>)
```
with the `pre-analysis`, `post-analysis`, and `pp-message` arguments that you were using before. Also make sure the observer (in your esv) has the `(multifile)` property.
* The editor-save call to `analysis-save-default(|<language>)` has been removed, remove that call. You can remove `editor-save` entirely if you don’t do any generation, also remove the `on save` strategy from ESV if you do. If you do generation but do not return a `(file, text)` tuple from editor-save, be sure to return a `!None()` to tell Spoofax that you’re returning nothing.
* The `index-setup` and `task-setup` strategies have been removed, Spoofax Core does this for you now. Remove all calls to these strategies.
* Remove the path argument to `analysis-resolve` in `editor-resolve`.
* Remove the path argument to `analysis-propose-completions` in `editor-complete`.
* Remove the `debug-reanalyze` strategy, and remove it from your menu in ESV. You can reanalyze by cleaning the project.

#### ESV

* The following ESV files are now deprecated, delete and remove any imports to these files:
  * <span class='file'>editor/langname-Completions.esv</span>
  * <span class='file'>editor/langname-Folding.esv</span>
  * <span class='file'>editor/langname-Refactorings.esv</span>
* Previously generated ESV files in the <span class='file'>editor</span> directory are not generated any more. Delete the generated files and remove the imports to generated files.
* The colorer ESV file is now generated to <span class='file'>src-gen/editor/Colorer.generated.esv</span>, import it with `imports editor/Colorer.generated` in an ESV file.
* The generated syntax ESV file is no longer generated. If you were using the defaults from the generated file, add them to an ESV file:
```esv
language

  line comment  : "//"
  block comment : "/*" * "*/"
  fences        : [ ] ( ) { }
```
* The outliner (<span class='file'>editor/langname-Outliner.str</span>) must be moved to the <span class='file'>trans</span> directory. Rename it to <span class='file'>trans/outline.str</file>, change its module to `outline`, and fix imports of the outliner.
* Change the file name of the main ESV file to <span class='file'>Main.esv</span>, and change its module to `Main`.
* In the main ESV file:
  * Change the parse table:
    ```esv
    table : target/metaborg/sdf.tbl
    ```
  * Change the Stratego providers
    * For ctree projects:
      ```esv
      provider : target/metaborg/stratego.ctree
      ```
    * For jar projects:
      ```esv
      provider : target/metaborg/stratego.jar
      ```
    * For projects with Java strategies:
      ```esv
      provider : target/metaborg/stratego.jar
      provider : target/metaborg/stratego-javastrat.jar
      ```

#### Java strategies

If your project has Java strategies:

* Create the <span class='file'>src/main/strategies</span> directory.
* Move Java strategies from <span class='file'>editor/java</span> into the <span class='file'>src/main/strategies</span> directory. Be sure to preserve the existing Java package structure.
* Perform a Maven update by right clicking the project and choosing <span class='menuselection'>Maven ‣ Update Project...</span>, to update the Java source directories of the project.

#### DynSem

If your project has manual DynSem Java files:

* Create the <span class='file'>src/main/ds</span> directory.
* Move manual DynSem Java files from <span class='file'>editor/java</span> into the <span class='file'>src/main/ds</span> directory. Be sure to preserve the existing Java package structure.
* Perform a Maven update by right clicking the project and choosing <span class='menuselection'>Maven ‣ Update Project...</span>, to update the Java source directories of the project.

#### Ant build customization

Language specification builds do not use Ant any more, so any customizations to the <span class='file'>build.main.xml</span> are lost.
To perform an Ant task before and after the build, add the following configuration option to your <span class='file'>metaborg.yaml</span> file:

```yaml
build:
  ant:
  - phase: preCompile
    file: ${path:root}/ant.xml
    target: generate-xml
  - phase: postCompile
    file: ${path:root}/ant.xml
    target: package-xml
```

See the [manual page on configuration](../../langdev/config/reference.md) for more information about configuring Ant build steps.

#### Eclipse plugin

Language specification projects are not Eclipse plugins any more.
To create an Eclipse plugin for your language, follow the [guide for exporting a language](../../langdev/guide/export.md) as an Eclipse plugin.

#### Git

If you're using Git, the <span class='file'>.gitignore</span> file is replaced with a new one, add entries that you need again.
All generated files that were previously not ignored, are ignored now. To delete all ignored files from the Git index (the files will remain on the filesystem but Git will forget about them), make sure all your useful changes are committed and pushed, then run the following commands:

```bash
git rm -r --cached .
git add .
git commit -am "Remove ignored files"
```

#### Building

When you are done with converting the project, build it with <kbd>Cmd+Shift+B</kbd> or <span class='menuselection'>Project ‣ Build</span>.
If the build does not work, try cleaning the project first with <span class='menuselection'>Project ‣ Clean<span>, and then building again.
Also make sure that <span class='menuselection'>Project ‣ Build Automatically</span> is turned on.
