# Spoofax 2.1.0 Migration Guide

This migration guide describes the differences between Spoofax 2.0 and 2.1 and how to convert to 2.1.

## New Stratego library for Spoofax

Historically, the `org.metaborg.meta.lib.analysis` library (also called the _runtime libraries_) from [this repo](https://github.com/metaborg/runtime-libraries/tree/master/org.metaborg.meta.lib.analysis/), was first used as a library to support NaBL, TS, and task engine based static analysis.
However, a lot of other functionality such as completions, refactoring, origin tracking, and annotation handling, was also added to the library for convenience.
Likewise, the `src-gen/stratego/metaborg.str` generated file also contains arbitrary functionality such as parsing and import path primitives, and the `src-gen/editor/Colorer.generated` generated file contains a default coloring scheme.

Since this kind of functionality does not belong the analysis library and generated files, we have moved this into a new library, `libspoofax`, which can be found at [this repo](https://github.com/metaborg/spoofax/tree/master/meta.lib.spoofax).

### Migration

The `org.metaborg.meta.lib.analysis` library still contains the old arbitrary functionality, but is now *deprecated*, meaning we will not update that functionality any more, and that it will be removed in a future version.
Any functionality pertaining NaBL, TS, and task engine based static analysis will of course be retained.
Likewise, the `src-gen/stratego/metaborg.str` and `src-gen/editor/Colorer.generated` generated files are also *deprecated*, meaning that they will stop being generated in a future version.

The new `libspoofax` library is now required for every Spoofax project.
Add a source dependency to `org.metaborg:meta.lib.spoofax:${metaborgVersion}` in your <span class='file'>metaborg.yaml</span> file.
For example, change the following dependencies:

```yaml
dependencies:
  compile:
  - org.metaborg:org.metaborg.meta.lang.esv:${metaborgVersion}
  - org.metaborg:org.metaborg.meta.lang.template:${metaborgVersion}
  - org.metaborg:org.metaborg.meta.lang.nabl:${metaborgVersion}
  - org.metaborg:org.metaborg.meta.lang.ts:${metaborgVersion}
  source:
  - org.metaborg:org.metaborg.meta.lib.analysis:${metaborgVersion}
```

into:

```yaml
dependencies:
  compile:
  - org.metaborg:org.metaborg.meta.lang.esv:${metaborgVersion}
  - org.metaborg:org.metaborg.meta.lang.template:${metaborgVersion}
  - org.metaborg:org.metaborg.meta.lang.nabl:${metaborgVersion}
  - org.metaborg:org.metaborg.meta.lang.ts:${metaborgVersion}
  source:
  - org.metaborg:meta.lib.spoofax:${metaborgVersion}
  - org.metaborg:org.metaborg.meta.lib.analysis:${metaborgVersion}
```

If you do not use NaBL, TS, and task engine based analysis any more, you can also delete the `org.metaborg:org.metaborg.meta.lib.analysis:${metaborgVersion}` source dependency.

Some imports have to be changed to point to the new `libspoofax` library:

* In `editor/Syntax.esv` or your equivalent ESV file that handles coloring:
  * Change import `editor/Colorer.generated` to `libspoofax/color/default`
* In `trans/analysis.str` for NaBL/TS projects:
  * Add import `libspoofax/core/language`
* In `trans/outline.str`:
  * Remove imports to the runtime libraries
  * Add import `libspoofax/editor/outline`
* In `trans/pp.str`:
  * Remove imports to the runtime libraries
  * Add imports `libspoofax/sdf/pp` and `libspoofax/editor/refactoring/-`
* In other Stratego files:
  * Remove all imports to the runtime libraries that do not pertain NaBL, TS, and task engine based static analysis, and replace them with `libspoofax` equivalents.
  * Remove all imports to the `stratego/metaborg` generated file, and replace them with `libspoofax` equivalents.
