```eval_rst
.. _2.5.5-migration-guide:
```

# Spoofax 2.5.5 Migration Guide

A few changes in Statix need migration for specs written for older
versions.

## Statix

A few features in Statix were not well-defined and removed until a
better way to support them is found. Therefore, the following changes
may require you to make small modifications to a specification:

1. Functional constraints can only have a single output.
2. Regular expression and label order must be direct parameters to
   queries.
3. Namespace based query short-hands require
   - a literal occurrence as argument, and
   - an explicit resolution policy entry.

### Functional constraint outputs

Functional constraints previously were allowed to have multiple output
arguments, such as:

    f : T * T -> T * T`

This was sometimes indistinguishable from types with a single tuple
output, such as:

    f : T * T -> (T * T)`

From now on, functional constraints can only have a single
output. Constraints with multiple outputs need to be rewritten to
return a tuple instead.

### Query parameters

Queries would accept arbitrary predicates for the label regular
expression and label order. For example, a query could be written as:

    query filter myWf and true
          min myOrd and false
          in s |-> _
          
with
          
    myWf(ls) :- pathMatch[P*](ls).
    
    myOrd(l1,l2) :- pathLt[$ < P](l1,l2).

This is not possible anymore, instead the regular expression and label
order must be direct parameters of the query. The query above should
be directly written as:

    query filter P* and true
          min $ < P and false
          in s |-> _

The following syntax is still accepted, but deprecated:

    query filter pathMatch[P*] and true
          min pathLt[$ < P] and false
          in s |-> _

### Namespace-based resolution shorthands

The requirements for namespace-based resolution shorthands have become
stricter.

First, if they are used, ther emust be an explicit resolution policy
for the namespace. For example, using a constraints such as:

    Var{x@-} in s |-> _
    type of Var{x@-} in s |-> _

requires in the signature at least:

    signature
      name-resolution
        resolve Var

A full resolution policy with regular expression and label order looks like this:

    signature
      name-resolution
        resolve Var filter P* min $ < P

Second, the namespace-based constraints require an occurrence
literal. The following does not work anymore:

    d == Var{x@-},
    d in s |-> _

The occurrence has to be repeated in the constraints, as:

    Var{x@-} in s |-> _

